Add multichain.md (#308)
postech-dao/simperby: docs/multichain.md

## Introduction

One of the most important features of Simperby is its multichain
interoperability. Any DAO (Decentralized Autonomous Organization) built with
Simperby can control various Dapps (Decentralized Applications) deployed on

> various existing chains, such as Ethereum. This could include a treasury for the

Author: why?

> various existing chains, such as Ethereum. This could include a treasury for the

Reviewer: I was thinking for people who are not familiar with blockchains, it would be better to say blockchain rather than chains. Maybe fixing it to "existing blockchains"? (if removing existing seems changing the meaning.)

> various existing chains, such as Ethereum. This could include a treasury for the

Author: I changed it to `existing blockchains`

organization, a token that the organization issues, or any other application
that the organization wants to build and deploy. This multichain communication
is performed in a **trustless and verifiable manner**, with reasonable cost and
efficiency.

## Light Client

A light client is a special optimization of a blockchain node that is capable of
verifying transactions or state entries without having the full blockchain
state. This is also known as Simplified Payment Verification (SPV) in Bitcoin.

The key idea of a light client is that a blockchain is **cryptographically
meaningful even if we take only the headers** of the chain (note that the block
body contains transactions).

> In Tendermint and Vetomint, the light client has a "last trusted header" as its

Author: They're different. Last trusted header is state of a light client, whereas last finalized header is state of the blockchain.

> In Tendermint and Vetomint, the light client has a "last trusted header" as its

Reviewer: Understood.

state, and it only accepts a new header if it is actually finalized by the

> consensus, as the next block to the last trusted header. **There is no authority

Reviewer 2: Does it mean the validators of a "last trusted header" validate(vote for a new block) a new block?

Author: nope. v2 is part of h1, which is finalize by v1, which is part of h0, and so on.

or trust in the header provider** as there is always a proof for the
finalization, the pre-commits from over 2/3 of the validators. If both the
content of the header and the accompanying pre-commits are valid, the light
client can update its state to the new header. Note that to verify the
pre-commits, the light client also must know the eligible validator set for the
new block. Fortunately, a block header contains either the validator set itself
(Simperby's way) or the hash of it (most other blockchains do this because they

> produce blocks frequently, so reducing the header size is important), so it can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
produce blocks frequently, so reducing the header size is important), so verification can
```

be trivially handled.

Now we know that a light client can track the canonical chain of headers only by
constantly accepting the headers and proof in a trustless and verifiable way.
Since a block header contains the Merkle root of the state and transactions, the
**light client can verify the inclusion of any state entry or transaction with
its Merkle proof**, at the given height. The light client may store all previous
headers that it has accepted so far to verify the inclusion from past blocks.

## Trustless Message Delivery

A light client takes blockchain headers and their proofs as the only input to
update its state. In other words, the light client can stay in sync with the
blockchain without accessing the network if there are constant header updates
from whoever submits valid ones.

Thanks to this simple but powerful property, it is possible to embed a light
client as a smart contract. This enables **trustless message delivery between

> two blockchains**, which is the key to multichain interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two different blockchains**, which is the key to multichain interoperability.
```
or
```suggestion
different blockchains**, which is the key to multichain interoperability.
```

> Suppose there are two chains called A and B. If the A chain has a light client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose there are two different blockchains called A and B. If the A chain has a light client
```

> of the B Chain deployed on it, whatever is finalized in the B chain can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the B Chain deployed on A chain, whatever finalized on the B chain can be
```

Maybe in and on both works with slightly different meanings. I want to ask Chatgpt but not possible at the moment.

> instantly verified in the A chain. Other contracts deployed on the A chain would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instantly verified on the A chain. Other contracts deployed on the A chain would
```
Same here, but we say deployed "on" chain here, so maybe "on"?

> interact with the B chain since the light client provides data from the B data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interact with the B chain since the light client provides data from the B chain
```

> after verification. This communication can trivially become two-way if the B

Reviewer: ```suggestion
after verification. This communication can trivially work both ways if the B
```

chain has a light client of the A chain as well.

> Cosmos IBC is an example of a protocol based on this idea. IBC defines multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cosmos IBC (Inter-Blockchain Communication) is an example of a protocol based on this idea. IBC defines multiple
```

> layers over the core communication primitive (two chains embedding light clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layers over the core communication primitive (two different chains embedding light clients
```

course, the most important applications would be existing other chains that the
organization deploys their applications on. From Simperby's view, they are
called **settlement chains**. Any blockchain that has a smart contract platform
can be a settlement chain once the organization pays some gas and deploys their
light client on it.

Simperby's scalability on settlement chain integration is quite impressive; the
code for the light client contract will be almost the same for every chain
except for a few virtual machine-specific behaviors and the host interface. This
enables **scalable development of light clients over various settlement
chains**, which eventually provides powerful multichain interoperability for the
DAO that uses Simperby.

Also, considering that a Simperby chain has no contracts or business logic but
is only capable of recording explicitly approved data, there is nothing to
execute automatically from the Simperby side. That is, the multichain
communication system **doesn't have to be two-way**. Things happen (finalized)
in the settlement chain might be delivered to the Simperby chain in the same way

> (embedding a light client) but that's just pointless; there's nothing to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(embedding a light client) but that's just pointless; there's no point to
```

Author: No, it's nothing. It's not pointless, but there's literally nothing to do.

Reviewer: Then how about fixing it to "literally nothing"?

Reviewer: https://github.com/postech-dao/simperby/pull/308#issuecomment-1412476722

> programmatically respond to such events. Instead, members of the chain will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
programmatically respond to such events. Instead, members of the Simperby chain will
```

> manually check the result from the settlement using whatever method they want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manually check the result from the settlement chain using whatever method they want
```

> and take it into account if it matters in deciding the next agenda in the
> Simperby chain. It could be a standalone light client, some centralized explorer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and take it into account if it matters in making a decision on the next agenda. It could be a standalone light client, some centralized explorer
```

like Etherscan, or some could even ignore the result if they think it's not

> important in the next agenda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
important for the next agenda.
```

There is **no communication between settlement chains** too. All required number
of communication channels (i.e., number of light clients) are exactly the same
as the number of settlement chains that the organization deploys.

### Currently Supported Settlement Chains

#### EVM

TODO

#### Non-EVM

TODO

> ## Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Applications
```

Reviewer: Multiple meaning usage of "application".

Author: I changed it to 'Dapps'

Using trustless message delivery, DAOs using Simperby can have various
multichain applications. One of the most important applications is a
**treasury** which holds tokens. Managing shared assets is by far the baseline
for establishing any working organization.

Thus, for every supported chain, both the light client and treasury contracts
are essential; Simperby provides them in a single contract while exposing an
interface to request verification (by the light client) of the incoming message,
for other contracts.

Here are other possible use cases of Simperby-controlled contracts:

1. A token that the organization issues and manages.
2. A complex version of the treasury that might interact with other DeFi
   services.
3. A delegator to participate in other on-chain DAOs, on behalf of the Simperby
   DAO.
4. A DeFi pool whose parameters are controlled by the Simperby DAO.
5. A bridge between two chains, where the Simperby DAO acts as the bridge
   provider.

## Universal Interoperability

DAO is a technology to build an organization over decentralized networks, but
its subject doesn't have to be limited to the blockchain. The Simperby protocol

> could govern the real-world part too, because we already have a solid way to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could govern the real-world parts too, because we already have a solid way to
```

deliver what's finalized by the consensus. This simple and trustless light
client can be easily embedded as a super lightweight module in any application
that is required to interact with a Simperby DAO. It could be a plugin attached
to a centralized service, a webpage, or even a legal contract. There's **no need
for a secure channel or complex authorization mechanism; it just works out of
the box**, in a fully trustless and end-to-end verifiable way.

Most of the existing blockchain protocols have light clients, but they could not
be as simple as Simperby's because of:

1. Frequent block production (Simperby produces blocks on demand)

> 2. Too many consensus participants (Simperby is a permissioned blockchain)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Too many consensus participants (Simperby is a blockchain engine for permissioned organizations)
```

3. Complex consensus algorithm (Simperby uses a variation of Tendermint, which
   is battle-tested in the Cosmos ecosystem)
4. Non-portable implementation (Simperby uses Rust, which can be both native and
   WASM-compiled)

## DAO Spaceship

Simperby is also known as **the engine for the DAO spaceship.** A DAO built with
Simperby is completely standalone, self-hosted, and fully sovereign. It has zero
dependency on any other blockchain or centralized service. It's like a spaceship
floating over the space, visiting and colonizing various planets (the settlement
chains).

All you need to do is just run a super-lightweight node to maintain the
distributed protocol. If you think it's time to contact an existing settlement
chain, just deploy your light client and explore the ecosystem. If the

> settlement chain suddenly collapses or you want to move to another one, just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
settlement chain suddenly collapses or if you want to move to another one, just
```

deploy another light client and you're good to go. You can even have multiple

> settlement chains that you effectively control. No matter what happens in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
settlement chains. No matter what happens in the
```

Author: I think it's worth reemphasizing the meaning of settlement chain here.

settlement chain, your DAO remains intact and fully functional. **Even if most
of the existing mainnets suddenly disappear and the Web3 industry collapses,
Simperby DAOs will survive, floating over the space and seeking the next
journey**.

## Zero-Knowledge Proof

> One potential problem of this multichain communication system is that the header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One potential problem of Simperby's multichain communication system is that the header
```

update cost is proportional to the number of consensus participants of the
Simperby chain. Since Simperby is a permissioned blockchain, the number of
consensus participants is quite limited, but it could still be costly if it is

> executed on an expensive chain like Ethereum mainnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
executed on an expensive chain like the Ethereum mainnet.
```

> To reduce the gas cost, we can use zero-knowledge proof technology to compress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce the gas cost, we can use zero-knowledge proofs to compress
```

## Introduction

One of the most important features of Simperby is its multichain
interoperability. Any DAO (Decentralized Autonomous Organization) built with
Simperby can control various Dapps (Decentralized Applications) deployed on
various existing blockchains, such as Ethereum. This could include a treasury
for the organization, a token that the organization issues, or any other

> application that the organization wants to build and deploy. This multichain

Author: Fixed. Also I added a new paragraph at the end of the 'Dapps' section.

communication is performed in a **trustless and verifiable manner**, with
reasonable cost and efficiency.

## Light Client

A light client is a special optimization of a blockchain node that is capable of
verifying transactions or state entries without having the full blockchain
state. This is also known as Simplified Payment Verification (SPV) in Bitcoin.

The key idea of a light client is that a blockchain is still **cryptographically
meaningful even if we take only the headers** of the chain (note that the block
body contains transactions).

In Tendermint and Vetomint, the light client has a "last trusted header" as its

> state, and it only accepts a new header if it is actually finalized by the

Author: fixed.

consensus, as the next block to the last trusted header. **There is no authority
or trust in the header provider** as there is always a cryptographic proof for
the finalization, the pre-commits from over 2/3 of the validators. If both the

> content of the header and the accompanying pre-commits are valid, the light

Author: Readers may get confused that the header is valid only if there's a proof as well. I emphasize as 'the content of the header' that the actual fields in the header matter to.

light client of the B Chain deployed on A chain, whatever finalized on the B
chain can be instantly verified on the A chain. Other contracts deployed on the
A chain would interact with the B chain since the light client provides data
from the B chain after verification. This communication can trivially work both
ways if the B chain has a light client of the A chain as well.

Cosmos IBC (Inter-Blockchain Communication) is an example of a protocol based on
this idea. IBC defines multiple layers over the core communication primitive
(two different chains embedding light clients of each other) to establish
high-level communication such as asset transfer. Various chains built with
Cosmos SDK (a.k.a. zones) are all standalone layer-1 networks, but they form an
organic multichain structure using IBC.

## Settlement Chain

Simperby is a standalone blockchain that has its own consensus mechanism and
distributed file system. However, there must be working applications that
interact with the Simperby chain so that the organization can finalize something
meaningful. Of course, the most important applications would be other existing

> chains that the organization deploys their applications on. From Simperby's

Author: fixed

view, they are called **settlement chains**. Any blockchain that has a smart
contract platform can be a settlement chain once the organization pays some gas
and deploys their light client on it.

Simperby's scalability over settlement chain integration is quite impressive;
the source code for the light client contract will be almost the same for every
chain except for a few virtual machine-specific behaviors and the host
interface. This enables **scalable development of light clients over various
settlement chains**, which eventually provides powerful multichain
interoperability for the DAO that uses Simperby.

Also, considering that a Simperby chain has no contracts or business logic but
is only capable of recording explicitly approved data, there is nothing to
execute automatically from the Simperby side. That is, the multichain

> communication system **doesn't have to be two-way**. Things happening

Reviewer 3: If I understand correctly, I think ```bidirectional``` is better than ```two-way```

Author: fixed.

### Currently Supported Settlement Chains

#### EVM

TODO

#### Non-EVM

TODO

## Dapps

Using trustless message delivery, DAOs using Simperby can have various
multichain applications. One of the most important applications is a
**treasury** which holds tokens since managing shared assets is by far the
baseline for establishing any working organization.

Thus, for every supported chain, both the light client and treasury contracts
are essential; Simperby provides them in a single contract while exposing an
interface to request verification (by the light client) of the incoming
messages, for other contracts.

Here are other possible use cases of Simperby-controlled contracts:

1. A token that the organization issues and manages.
2. A complex version of the treasury that might interact with other DeFi
   services.
3. A delegator to participate in other on-chain DAOs, on behalf of the Simperby
   DAO.
4. A DeFi pool whose parameters are controlled by the Simperby DAO.
5. A bridge between two different chains, where the Simperby DAO acts as the
   bridge provider.

Simperby DAOs can also interact with external Dapps. Organizations can upload a

> Simperby-controlloed wallet to use various existing Dapps. Additionally, as the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Simperby-controlled wallet to use various existing Dapps. Additionally, as the
```
